.\" cado-nfs.1 -- man page for the CADO-NFS top-level driver (cado-nfs-modern fork)
.\" Roadmap E6 (v3.3.0-modern) + E9-E12/A7 (v3.4.0-modern); see
.\" docs/usability-v330.md and docs/usability-v340.md.
.TH CADO\-NFS 1 "2026" "cado-nfs-modern 3.4.0" "CADO-NFS Manual"
.SH NAME
cado\-nfs.py \- factor an integer or compute a discrete logarithm with the Number Field Sieve
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cado\-nfs.py
.I N
.RI [ key=value ...]
.RI [ options ]
.br
.B cado\-nfs.py
.I parameter_snapshot_file
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B CADO\-NFS
is an implementation of the Number Field Sieve (NFS) for integer
factorization and for discrete logarithms in prime fields and small-degree
extensions. The Python driver
.B cado\-nfs.py
orchestrates the full pipeline \(em polynomial selection, lattice sieving,
filtering (merge/purge), linear algebra (Block Wiedemann), and the algebraic
square root \(em across one or many machines.
.PP
This is the
.B cado\-nfs\-modern
fork (internal version
.BR 3.3.0\-modern ),
a modernization and performance fork of upstream CADO-NFS 3.0.0. The NFS
algorithms and parameters are unchanged from upstream; the fork adds GPU
acceleration (cofactorization, linear algebra, polynomial selection),
SIMD kernels, a Rust orchestration layer, and the operator-experience tooling
described under
.B OPTIONS
and
.BR ENVIRONMENT .
.PP
.B cado\-nfs.py
deduces its compiled binary directory automatically; invoke it from the source
root rather than calling stage binaries by path. It is optimized for numbers
larger than 85 digits; inputs below 60 digits are unsupported \(em strip small
factors (trial division, P\(+-1, ECM) first.
.PP
.B Argument-order quirk:
.IR key=value
parameters (and
.IR N )
must be contiguous and come
.I before
dashed flags, e.g.
.RB ` "cado\-nfs.py N server.ssl=no \-t 4" '.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Planning and status (no computation is run for the first three)
.TP
.B \-\-plan
Estimate feasibility, a wall-time envelope, the per-phase split, a
single-machine-vs-cluster recommendation, and GPU triage for
.IR N ;
print the plan and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-plan\-json
As
.BR \-\-plan ,
but emit the plan as JSON.
.TP
.B \-\-doctor
Run a side-effect-free preflight: check the build, GPU/CPU/SIMD capabilities,
and disk/RAM headroom against the resource estimate for
.IR N ,
then print a report and a GO/NO-GO verdict. Use
.B \-\-doctor\-json
for machine-readable output. (v3.3.0-modern.)
.TP
.B \-\-suggest\-params
Resolve the default parameter file for
.IR N
(interpolating between the nearest presets when no exact one exists), print it,
and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-autotune
Calibrate only the safe scheduling knobs (local client/thread layout, work-unit
granularity) to this host. The number-theoretic bounds are never changed, so the
result is identical; only how the work is chunked differs.
.TP
.B \-\-json\-status \fIFILE\fR
Write a machine-readable run-status snapshot (phase, percent, ETA, work-unit
counts, factors) to
.IR FILE ,
rewritten atomically as the run progresses.
.TP
.B \-\-progress
Show a compact single-line progress indicator (phase, percent, ETA) on stderr.
Pair with
.B \-\-screenlog WARNING
for a clean line.
.TP
.B \-\-host\-speed \fIFACTOR\fR
Per-core speed of this host relative to the benchmark reference (1.0 = reference
class), used to scale the
.B \-\-plan
estimate.
.SS Resources and layout
.TP
.B \-t, \-\-server\-threads \fINCORES\fR
Total threads (overrides tasks.threads).
.I NCORES
may be
.BR all .
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-slaves \fIN\fR
Number of local clients (aliases slaves.nrclients).
.TP
.B \-\-client\-threads \fIN\fR
Threads per sieving / polynomial-selection job.
.TP
.B \-w, \-\-workdir \fIDIR\fR
Working directory (created if absent; a temporary one is used otherwise).
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-parameters \fIFILE\fR
Parameter file to use.
.TP
.B \-\-server
Run a bare work-unit server; do not start any local clients.
.SS Computation type
.TP
.B \-\-dlp\fR, \fB\-\-fact\fR, \fB\-\-cl
Select discrete logarithm, factorization (default), or class-group computation.
.TP
.B \-gfpext \fIK\fR
Degree of the finite-field extension (DLP only).
.TP
.B \-ell \fIL\fR
The group order (DLP only; aliases ell).
.SS GPU front-ends (need a \-DENABLE_GPU=ON build)
.TP
.B \-\-gpu\-prefactor
Strip small/medium factors with GPU ECM before NFS. If
.I N
fully factors, NFS is skipped; otherwise NFS continues on the cofactor.
Tunable via
.BR \-\-gpu\-b1 ,
.BR \-\-gpu\-b2 ,
.BR \-\-gpu\-curves .
.TP
.B \-\-gpu\-polyselect
.B EXPERIMENTAL:
offload polynomial-selection collision search to the GPU. Produces a
bit-identical polynomial set; size-gated, so it is a no-op (no regression) at
small sizes and the win grows with
.IR N .
.SS Monitoring, notifications & history (v3.4.0-modern)
.TP
.B \-\-notify \fICHANNELS\fR
Send a completion/failure notification when the run finishes.
.I CHANNELS
is a comma-separated list of \fIkind\fR[=\fItarget\fR] entries:
.BR desktop ,
.BI ntfy= TOPIC ,
.BI slack= WEBHOOK ,
.BI discord= WEBHOOK ,
.BI webhook= URL ,
.BI email= ADDR .
SMTP credentials and the ntfy server come from the \fB[notifications]\fR parameter
block or \fBCADO_SMTP_*\fR/\fBCADO_NTFY_SERVER\fR environment variables, so secrets
stay out of the committed parameter snapshot. A channel error is logged and
skipped; it never affects the factorization.
.TP
.B \-\-json\-log \fIFILE\fR
Append a structured NDJSON event log (\fBrun_start\fR / \fBphase_start\fR /
\fBrun_finish\fR, one JSON object per line) to
.IR FILE ,
for \fBtail \-f | jq\fR, Grafana/Loki ingestion or post-hoc analysis. Independent
of \fB\-\-json\-status\fR (a live snapshot).
.TP
.B \-\-list\-runs\fR, \fB\-\-compare\-runs \fISPEC\fR
Print the local run history from \fB~/.cado\-nfs/runs.db\fR and exit.
.I SPEC
is empty (recent runs), a digit count (all runs at that size, with min/mean/max
wall time), or two run ids \fIA\fB:\fIB\fR (a side-by-side comparison).
.TP
.B \-\-calibrate
Back out this host's per-core speed factor (vs the benchmark reference) from its
recorded runs and print the suggested \fB\-\-host\-speed\fR value plus a
data-driven cost-model fit, then exit. Sharpens
.B \-\-plan
as the run history grows; it changes no number-theoretic bound.
.TP
.B \-\-wizard
Interactive parameter wizard: a few questions (size, threads, GPU, notifications,
single-machine vs cluster) then a ready-to-run command line and its rationale.
Nothing runs until you copy the command.
.PP
The Flask and Rust work-unit servers also expose a Prometheus
.B /metrics
endpoint (run state, phase, percent, work-unit and elapsed gauges) alongside the
existing \fB/status\fR and \fB/dashboard\fR; the live dashboard and
.BR cado\-nfs\-monitor\-rs (1)
show per-phase and all-phases ETAs.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B CADO_DEBUG
If set, keep all intermediate computation data instead of cleaning up.
.TP
.B CADO_NFS_MAX_THREADS
Upper bound on threads CADO will use, regardless of \fB\-t\fR.
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_DEVICE
CUDA device index for the GPU back-ends.
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_NPART
Number of GPU partitions for the multi-GPU Block-Wiedemann SpMV (default 1).
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_SPMV
Force the GPU SpMV kernel: \fBvec\fR (sub-warp, cache-resident) or \fBwarp\fR
(latency-hiding). Omitted = adaptive dispatch.
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_VECRESIDENT\fR, \fBCADO_GPU_DEVCOMM
Keep the Block-Wiedemann vectors resident on-device (\fB=1\fR) and run the 2D
communication on-device, respectively.
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_POLYSELECT\fR, \fBCADO_GPU_POLYSELECT_ROOTS
Enable GPU polynomial-selection collision offload; the \fB_ROOTS\fR variant
additionally opts into the (measured-negative) GPU root-finding path.
.TP
.B CADO_GPU_LINGEN_NTT
.B EXPERIMENTAL (v3.3.0-modern, DLP):
use the GPU NTT path for the GF(p) lingen polynomial-matrix multiply.
.TP
.B CADO_RUST_WU_SERVER
Path to the Rust work-unit server binary; when set, the Python driver launches it
in place of the Flask server (the HTTP/JSON protocol is identical).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Factor a 59-digit number on four cores (a ~15 s smoke test):
.PP
.RS
.nf
cado\-nfs.venv/bin/python3 ./cado\-nfs.py \\
  90377629292003121684002147101760858109247336549001090677693 \-t 4
.fi
.RE
.PP
Estimate cost without running, then check the environment:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&./cado\-nfs.py <N> \-\-plan
\&./cado\-nfs.py <N> \-\-doctor
.fi
.RE
.PP
Resume an interrupted run from its parameter snapshot:
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&./cado\-nfs.py /path/XXX.parameters_snapshot.YYY
.fi
.RE
.PP
Run with a desktop + ntfy notification on completion and a structured event log
(v3.4.0-modern):
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&./cado\-nfs.py <N> \-\-notify desktop,ntfy=my\-topic \\
  \-\-json\-log run.ndjson \-t 8
.fi
.RE
.PP
Inspect the run history, then calibrate this host's plan estimate
(v3.4.0-modern):
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&./cado\-nfs.py \-\-list\-runs
\&./cado\-nfs.py \-\-compare\-runs 90
\&./cado\-nfs.py \-\-calibrate
.fi
.RE
.PP
Let the wizard build a command line interactively (v3.4.0-modern):
.PP
.RS
.nf
\&./cado\-nfs.py \-\-wizard
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I parameters/
Per-size parameter presets (c60, c90, ...).
.TP
.I build/<hostname>/
Out-of-tree build directory (auto-detected).
.TP
.I misc/completions/
Shell completions for bash, zsh, and fish.
.TP
.I ~/.cado\-nfs/runs.db
Local SQLite run history (\fB\-\-list\-runs\fR / \fB\-\-compare\-runs\fR /
\fB\-\-calibrate\fR); override the path with \fBCADO_RUNS_DB\fR.
.SH SEE ALSO
The bundled README, README.dlp (discrete logarithm), and README.Python
(orchestration internals); the deep-dives under
.IR docs/ ;
and the project CHANGELOG.
.SH AUTHORS
Upstream CADO-NFS by the CADO-NFS development team (INRIA CARAMBA, LGPL-2.1+).
The cado-nfs-modern fork adds the GPU/SIMD/Rust/UX work documented in
.IR CHANGELOG.md .
